{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red38\green38\blue38;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs34 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
It led to a \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
mile-long tunnel \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
to a construction site. The tunnel was tall enough for Mr. Guzm\'e1n to walk through standing upright \'97 his nickname translates to Shorty \'97 and had been dug more than 30 feet underground. It was equipped with lighting, ventilation and a motorcycle on rails. Some engineers estimated that the tunnel took \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
more than a year \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
and at least $1 million to build. 
\f1\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs34 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The prison break humiliated the government of Mr. Pe\'f1a Nieto, which had proclaimed the arrests of Mr. Guzm\'e1n and the leaders of other drug cartels as crucial achievements in restoring order and sovereignty to a country long beleaguered by the horrific violence associated with organized crime. It was particularly embarrassing because Mr. Guzm\'e1n had already \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
escaped from prison \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in 2001, when his conspirators managed to smuggle him out. By some accounts, he escaped that time by hiding in a laundry bin. 
\f1\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs34 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
There are still major questions ahead, including the potential extradition of Mr. Guzm\'e1n to the United States. Shortly after Mr. Guzm\'e1n was captured in 2014, the attorney general of Mexico at the time refused to extradite him to the United States, saying that the criminal would serve his time in Mexico first before he was sent to another country. 
\f1\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs34 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Officials and analysts said it was an effort to show sovereignty and put some distance between the Mexican authorities and their American counterparts, who often used a heavy hand to influence policy in Mexico. 
\f1\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs34 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
But that stance came to haunt the Pe\'f1a Nieto administration after the kingpin escaped. The United States had issued a formal request for his extradition less than three weeks before \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mr. Guzm\'e1n broke out\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. 
\f1\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs34 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A few months later, the Mexican government \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
extradited several \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
top drug lords to the United States, suggesting a new spirit of cooperation in the wake of Mr. Guzm\'e1n\'92s escape. The people extradited included an American citizen, Edgar Valdez Villarreal, a notorious figure known as \'93La Barbie,\'94 as well as people charged with participating in the murders of a United States Consulate 
\f1\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
}